# CH101 - 8/25/2021
## Chapter 2 - Quantum Theory
### Where are the electrons?
- Chemical bonds are based on the sharing of electrons, so we want to know where they are.
- Light can act as a wave and a particle, it acts as a particle when transferring energy via collision.
- Hz(hertz) = (cycles/seconds)
- Wavelength = (distance/cycles)
- velocity = (distance/time)
## Electromagnetic Radiation
- Waves have a frequency
- Use the greek letter 'nu' ,V, for frequeency, and units as "cycles per sec".
- All light radiation = lambda * nu = c
- Where C is the speed of light

## Calculating the speed of light
- convert measurements to metres
- c/wavelength = frequency
### Quanitization of Energy
- Expectation: As you heat up an object, the more photons are emitted.
- Observation: As you heat an object, shorter wavelength lights are emitted. (higher frequency)
#### Energy of Light
- Energy of a photon of light (E = h * v)
    - h is plancks constant. (6.6262e-34)
#### Exercise: 
- Light consists of particles called Photons which possess discrete energy.
- Problem: Calculate the energy of 1.00 mol of photons of red light.
- freq, mm -> freq, m -> v,s-1, E, J/photon -> E, J/mol
- Check the powerpoint later for this lesson
### The photoelectric effect
- If you hit electrons with high energy light then electrons will pop off of the atom.
- Expected: Making a light brighter and brighter would cause more electrons to jump out.
- Observed: No electrons where observed until the light of a certain minimum energy used.
Increasing the intensity of the light (above the minimum energy required) increased the number of electrons that are ejected
- Based on the frequency of the light
- Photons require a certian amount of energy to begin electron ejection.
### Arrangement of Electrons in AToms
- Electrons are arranged as 
- Shells -> Subshells -> Ortbitals
- 1s 2s etc.. is the principal quantum number
- Subshells are SPDF
- Subshells decide the shape of the orbital
- In an orbital two electrons can pair up with opposite spins, but only two electrons can be in each oribital.
### Hund's Rule
- When filling orbitals of the same energy, fill them with electrons singly first, where all electrons have the same spin, then you may fill space with electrons of opposite spins.