# ARE 201 2021/9/27 - Unit 10 [Utility]
- No due dates this weekend
## Upcoming Due Dates
- Wednesday Unit 10 multiple choice quiz
- Thursday Unit 10 short answer quiz
## Objectives
- Describe the concept of utility and explain how consumers spend in order to maximize utility.
- Identify and contrast the substitution and income effect.
- Find __consumer equilibrium__ using a __budget constraint__.
- Contrast and compute __total nad maringal utility__.
- Calculate __utility-maximizing choice__ using __marginal utility per dolar__.
    - Describe how __demand curves__ are derived from __consumer equilibrium__.
## The concept of utility
- Consumers are trying to get the __most__ from a __limited budget__
- They are trying to maximize the __total utility__ or satisfaction they can get from __consuming goods__ given their __budget constraint__
## How consumers maximize utility
- __Budget Constraint__ possible combinations of two goods that are affordable given at a customers limited income
- __Utility__ the satisfaction received from receiving some good or service
- __Total Utility__ total satisfaction from receiving all goods and services.
## Budget Constraint Graph Example
- Points on the line represent possible combinations
- We assume that the person tries to find a combination of the goods that gives them the largest total utility(satisfaction).
## Comparing utility/satisfaction
- __Cannot compare the utility between individuals__ utility is relative depending on the individuals.
- We can compare the relative satisfaction of differnet things for one individual
## Total Utility
- Typical trend for total utiltity is that total utility increases as the consumption of the good increases, but it increases at a decreasing rate with hte more units being consumed.
## Marginal Utility vs Total Utility
- Individuals rarely face all or nothing decisions, but most of hte time they are considering a little more or a little less of something hwen allocating budget, time, or other scare resources.
    - The marginal utility of a third slice of pizza will be less than the second or first slice.
### Marginal Utility
- Is the additional utiltiy provided by one additional unit of consumption
- Marginal Utility = (Change in Total Utility / Change in Quantity)
- This represents the law of dimishing marginal utility.
## Rules for maximizing utility
- The combinations of goods and services that will _maximize an individual's total utility_.
- __Marginal Utility per dollar__: the amount of marginal utility received per dollar sputility received
