# ARE 201 - 9/1/2021
## Important Dates
- September 4 - 11:59 PM
- September 5 - 11:59 PM
- September 6 - No Class!
- September 8 - Exam 1 - Normal Room - Lecture Time
    - Can prepare 2 pages of notes
## Unit 5 - Supply and Demand
### Demand Curve Shifters
- Income
    - Demand for a normal good is positively ralted to income Ex. Casual Dining
    - Demand for an inferior good is negatively related to income Ex. Fast Food
- Changing tastes
    - Anything that causes a change in taste in favor of a good will increase the demand of that good (right shift), and vice versa.
- Prices of related goods
    - Substitutes: An increase in the price of one causes an __increase__ of demand for the other.
    - Compllement: An increase of price for one causes a __decrease__ of demand in the other.
    - Substitute = Inversely proportional, Compliment = Proportional
    - Expectations
        - If people expect their incomes to rise, their demand for meals at expensive resturaunts may increase now.
        - If the economy turns bad, their demand for meals at expensive resuraunts bay decrease now.
## Supply Curve Shifters
- Natural Conditions
    - Changes in weather and climate will affect the cost of production for many agricultural products.
        - Example: Drought in Minnesota, South dakota, and north Dakota affected the corn crop
    - Input Price: wages, prices of raw materials, A fall in input prices makes production more profitable at each output price, so firms supply a larger  quantity at each price, and the Supply curve shifts to the right.
    - Technology determines the amount of input required to achieve an output
        -  A cost saving technological advancement has the same effect as a fall in input prices, supply curve shifts to the right
    - Government Policies can affec the cost of production and the supply curve through taxes, regulations, and subsidies.
        - Example: Tax: Higher costs for producing goods -> decrease in supply.
        - Subsidies: agricultural products -> increase the supply.
    - Expectations:
        - Suppose a firm expects hte price of the good it sells to rise in the future, they may save some fo its inventory to sell later at the higher price.
        - This would shift the s curve to the left.
- If two factors that effect the same value have differing effects on that value, it should be labeled as "ambiguous"
