# ARE 201 - 8-23-2021
## Unit 3 Economic Models and Trade offs.

## Due Dates - Week 2
- 8/28 (Saturday) - Unit 3 Multiple Choice Quiz
- 8/29 (Sunday) - Unit 3 Short Answer Quiz
- Quizzes Open on Wednesday (Do this)

## Unit 3 Objectives
- Importance of trade-offs
- Interperet production possibolity frontier, in terms of effiency, opportunity cost, economic growth
- Calculate opportunity cost of producing an item
- Describe the difference between comparative and absolute advantage
- apply comparative advantage -> leads to gains in trade (both graph and table)
- Analyze current events for gains from tradei, opportunity cost, and comparative advantage
- Evaluate winners and losers in trade
- Explain the law of diminishing contends and how it pertains to PPF(descrbied above)

### Choices and Trade Offs
- Generally higher degree = higher salary,
 so why not get a high degree
 - choices + tradeoffs determine this
### Budget Constraints
- All possible consumption combinations of goods that someone can affort given the prices of goods when all income in spent.
- Opportunity set - can spend all of budget or only some of the budget
### The Budget Contraint
- Each poiint on the budget contraint is a combination of purchase decisions. (Think back to hamburgers and bus tickets example)
- The slope of the budget contraint is the relative price between the goods compared
### Opportuntiy Cost
- Opportunity cost can be calculated as what you give up. For example when you have $10 and you have the options of buying $2 Hamburgers or $.50 bus tickets, each hamburger has an opportunity cost of 4 bus tickets (the slope of the opportunity cost diagram)
### Sunk Costs
- Costs that were incurred in the past and cannot be recovered
- Example: A firm finds it hart to give up on a new product that is doing poorly becuase much money was spent in creating the product.
- The lesson of sunk costs is to ignore the past errors and make decisions based on what will happen in the future.
### Marginal Decision - Making
- Marignal Analysis: examining the benefits of costs of choosing more or a little less of a good.
- Utility: Satisfaction, usefulness, or value one obtains from consuming goods or services
- The law of diminishing marginal utility: as a person recieves more of a good, the additional (or marginal) utility from each additional unity of the good declines.
- Example: The first of slice of pizze eaten when hungry brings more satisfaction than the sixth.
### Production Possibilities Frontier
- PPF: a diagram that shows the productively efficient combinations of two products that an economy can produce given the resources it has available.
- The slope of PPF: the opportunity cost.
- PPF shows a tradeoff between devoting social resources to healthcare and devoting social resourcse to education.
- In PPF opporunity cost varies by the point of measurement
## Similarirties Betwen Budget Constraint and PPF
- Both budget constraint and social ppf show the constraints under whicih individual consumers and society operate as a whole.
- Both diagrams show the tradeoff in choosing more of one good at the cost of less of another.
### Productive Efficiency vs Allocative Efficiency
- Productive Efficiency: when it is impossible to produce more of one good without decreasing another good.
- Any choice inside the PPF is inefficient because it is possible to produce more of one good, the other good, or some combination of both goods.
- Allocative Efficiency: When the mix of goods produced represents the mix of that society most desires.
- all choices along a given ppf display productive efficiency, any points within the graph are not productively efficient.
- An outward shift of the productivity frontier can be caused
    - Technological increases
    - Increase in the economies resources.