# CH101 - 8/30/2021
## Chapter 3 
- Principle quantum number is the prefix in the borh model of naming (1)s<sup>2</sup>

## Last Session Review
### Schrondingers Wave Ewuation
- n = principle quantum number
- l = angular momentum quantum number (n-1)
- m<sub>l</sub> = describes the orientation in space (where l is 0) = 0, where l = 1 (-1,0,1)
 - [-l..., 0 , ...l]
 - Exceptions, a half full d block or a full d block, it steals an electron from the S sub shell to get a half full d sub shell, or steal one from the s sub shell to get a full d sub shell = (Cr/Cu families)
### Differnet Types of Electrons
- Core elections: low energy fulled shells, tightly bound
- Valence electrons, - in the highest energy orbitals, more loosely bound. ( responsible for forming chemical bonds).
#### Coulumbs law
- Distance in inversely proportional to the charge between two atoms. (closer we are the smaller the energy is.)
- Feeding an electron energy puts it into a higher energy level orbital.
- Removing the energy causes it to crash down to a level closer to the nucleus
- Remember exicted electron states from AP Chem
### Valence Electrons
- s-block: Highest energy s electrons
- d-block: Highest energy s and d electrons
- p-block: Highest energy s and p electrons
- Noble gasses have *all* core electrons.
- Elements try to attain a formation that contains only core elctrons
### Effective Nuclear Charge Z\* or Z<sub>eff</sub>
- 1s on H 'feels' like +1 charge
- 2s on Li 'feels' like a 1.3 charge (not +3)
### Periodic Trends
- Atomic radius increases with orbitals and decreases with additional protons (Fr Largest, F is smallest (ignoring hydrogen and helium))
- Effective Nuclear Charges typically increase with increasing protons, but decreases with adding a new orbital. (Noble gasses have the most effective nuclear charge in their periods, and group 1 elements have the least)
- Size decreases across the period due to the increase in Z*. Each added valence aelectron feels a greater and greater (+) charge.
### Ion sizes
- The size of ions differ from that of a base atom.
- Li (152pm) -> Li+ (78pm)
- F(71pm) -> F-(133pm)
- Positively charged ions get smaller, and negatively charged ions get larger.
### Electronegativity
- x is a measure of the abilirt of an atom in a molecule to attrace electrons to itself.
- Electronegativity increases from left to right and increases from bottom to top
